docs/api/use-rx-state.md, before:

# State Management

Tools for creating and managing a flux-like state with full RxJS compatibility.

[[toc]]

## `useRxState`

Allows to bind reducers to a reactive state and observables.

[Source](https://github.com/Raiondesu/vuse-rx/blob/main/src/use-rx/use-rx-state.ts)

### Description

Implements a light flux pattern using rxjs' [Observables](https://rxjs.dev/guide/observable).

Even though state management is not the primary concern of `vuse-rx`,
it still allows for a basic flux-like state management with observables using `useRxState`.

This function returns 3 key parts:
- Reactive **state**
- State **reducers**
- RXjs **observable**

All of them work in unison to always keep vue components in sync with the application business logic.

![diagram](/vuse.svg)

The big difference from other flux-like solutions is that
`useRxState` doesn't care whether it's a singleton that manages the state of the whole application
or just used locally in a component. Therefore, it's much more flexible for small- to mid- scale applications.

It accepts, at minimum, an initial state and some reducers:

```ts
const state = { count: 0 };
const reducers = {
  increment: () => state => ({ count: state.count + 1 })
};

// Now using const destructuring:
const {
  // actions that mutate the state via reducers
  actions,

  // vue reactive state
  state,

  // state observable
  state$,

  // observables that are triggered on specific actions
  actions$
} = useRxState(state)(reducers).subscribe();
```

And returns a reactive state, actions, and some observables to make things easier to control.

`useRxState` automatically makes the state reactive for Vue, so you don't need to worry about applying `reactive` to it.

#### Options and fine-tuning

`useRxState` allows to change some of its behaviour via the optional `options` parameter in the first function.

##### Mutation strategy

Via options you can change how new mutations are applied to the state:

```ts
import {
  useRxState,
  // this is the default mutation merge strategy
  deepReplaceArray,
  // fast checker of whether we can mutate the state deeper
  canMergeDeep
} from 'vuse-rx';

useRxState(initialState, {
  mutationStrategy: (
    // A full base state to mutate
    state,
    // Current mutation strategy (this exact function)
    mutate
  ) => (
    // Mutation to apply
    mutation
  ) => {
    // Let's say, we also need to apply our mutations to symbols:
    for (const key of Object.getOwnPropertySymbols(mutation)) {
      // Check if we can go deeper
      state[key] = canMergeDeep(state, mutation, key)
        // If yes - mutate the state further using our function
        ? mutate(state[key])(mutation[key])
        // if no - just assign the value of our mutation
        : mutation[key];
    }

    // Apply the default strategy once we're done
    return deepReplaceArray(state)(mutation);
    // or...

    // if we need to restrict our mutations to symbols only
    // we can just return the state
    // without applying the default strategy
    return state;
  }
});
```

There are 3 mutation strategies provided out-of the box:
- `shallow` - surface-level merge, equivalent to an object spread\
  (`state = { ...state, ...mutation }`)
- `deep` - recursively merges mutations with the state
- `deepReplaceArray` - **DEFAULT** - same as `deep`, but does a simple shallow replacement for arrays

Each mutation strategy sets its own mutation type, so a mutation for the `deep` strategy may be different from a mutation for the `shallow` strategy.

However, mutation type is not restricted to a product of the initial state or an object even!\
You can even pass a string if you want to:

```ts
useRxState({ count: 0 }, {
  // This is not advised, of course, but for the sake of example...
  mutationStrategy: state => (mutation: 'increment' | 'decrement') => ({
    count: mutation === 'increment' ? state.count + 1 : state.count - 1
  }),
})({
  increment: () => 'increment',
  decrement: () => 'decrement',
});
```

### Type Signature and overloads

```ts
function <S extends Record<string, any>, Mutation>(
  initialState: S | (() => S),
  options?: RxStateOptions
) => <R extends StateReducers<S>>(
  reducers: R,
  map$?: (
    state$: Observable<Readonly<S>>,
    reducers: R,
    state: Readonly<S>,
    actions$: Record<`${keyof R}$`, Observable<S>>,
    context: MutationContext
  ) => Observable<Mutation>
) => {
  actions: ReducerActions<R>;
  state: S;
  state$: Observable<S>;
  actions$: ReducerObservables<ReducerActions<R>, S>;
  subscribe: (next?) => {
    actions: ReducerActions<R>;
    state: S;
    state$: Observable<S>;
    actions$: ReducerObservables<ReducerActions<R>, S>;
    subscription: { unsubscribe(): void };
  };
}
```

This function is split into two parts:
1. State-capturing function - determines the shape and contents of the state and returns the second part:
2. Reducers-capturing function - sets the reducers

This is done in order to enable [full type inference in reducers](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript/issues/14400#issuecomment-507638537).

#### 1. **State**-capturing function

```ts
function <S extends Record<string, any>, Mutation = deepReplaceArrayMutation>(
  initialState: S | (() => S),
  options?: RxStateOptions<S, Mutation>
): Function
```

Accepts either a state object or a state factory function and an optional options object.\
It remembers the state, applies the options, and then returns the second function.

#### 2. **Reducers**-capturing function

```ts
function <R extends StateReducers<S>>(
  reducers: R,
  map$?: (
    state$: Observable<Readonly<S>>,
    reducers: R,
    state: Readonly<S>,
    actions$: Record<`${keyof R}$`, Observable<S>>,
    context: MutationContext
  ) => Observable<Mutation>
) => SubscribableRxRes<ReducerActions<R>, S>
```

There's a lot to unpack. Let's go one parameter at-a-time.

For a detailed usage examples with both parameters see the [`stopwatch` recipe](/recipes/stopwatch).

##### Parameter 1: `reducers`

This function's primary goal is to bind reducers to the state.

The reducers are passed in as a first parameter in [the following format](https://github.com/Raiondesu/vuse-rx/blob/main/src/use-rx.ts#L236).
Each **reducer** must **return** either **a part of the state** or **an observable** that emits a part of the state.

A reducer can be either state**ful** or state**less**:
- A state**ful** reducer uses a state object to compute the mutation:\
  For example, an add-reducer:
  ```ts
  // Reducer returns a function that accepts a state and a mutation context
  // and returns the final mutation
  (addAmount) => (state, mutation) => ({ count: state.count + addAmount })
  ```

- A state**less** reducer only uses its initial parameters to compute the mutation:\
  For example, a replace-reducer:
  ```ts
  // Reducer returns the final mutation right away
  (newValue) => ({ count: newValue })
  ```

The resulting mutation is then automatically merged with the current state.

Let's see a complete example:
```ts
useRxState({ count: 0 })({
  // stateful
  add: (addAmount) => (state, mutation) => ({ count: state.count + addAmount }),

  // stateless
  set: (newValue) => ({ count: newValue }),
}).subscribe()
```

It's also possible to inform observables about errors or make them complete
from within the reducers. The `mutation` context parameter is used for this.\
`mutation` is optional, however, so it is recommended to use the
[optional chaining (`?.`) operator](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Optional_chaining)
when using it.

Let's rewrite our `add` reducer with this in mind:
```ts
const maximumValue = 10;

const { actions, state } = useRxState({ count: 0 })({
  add: (addAmount) => (state, mutation) => {
    if (addAmount < 0) {
      // Raise a mutation error
      mutation?.error('add amount cannot be negative!');

      // Signify that no changes need to be made
      return {};
    }

    const newValue = state.count + addAmount;

    if (newValue >= maximumValue) {
      // This mutation will never be called again
      mutation?.complete();
    }

    return { count: newValue };
  }
}).subscribe({
  error: errorText => {
    console.error('Oh no, an error:', errorText);
  },
  complete: () => {
    console.log('Counter stopped at ', state.count);
  }
});

actions.add(9);

// 50%
if (Math.random() > 0.5) {
  actions.add(-1);
  //> Oh no, an error: add amount cannot be negative!
} else {
  actions.add(1);
  //> Counter stopped at 10
}
```

##### Parameter 2: `map$`

It's also possible to modify the resulting observable using the second parameter, `map$`.\
It accepts a function with the following parameters:
- `state$` - the resulting observable (fired on each action)
- `reducers` - a map of raw reducers (basically, the first parameter itself)
- `state` - current reactive state
- `actions$` - a map of all observables that are fired on action calls
- `context` - a current mutation context, same as the one in the reducers,\
  can be passed into the reducers to allow them to control the mutation too
and expects a state observable to be returned from it.

```ts
useRxState(state)(
  reducers,
  // add this parameter to any useRxState call to try
  (state$, reducers, state, actions$, context) => {
    console.log('This is logged only once');
    console.log('These are all reducers defined above, unchanged:', reducers);
    console.log('This is an initial reactive state:', state);
    console.log('This is a map of all actions to their secific observables:', actions$);
    console.log('This context can be used to create an error or to complete the observable:', context);

    // By the way, state$ is just merged actions$,
    // so this
    return state$.pipe(tap(state => console.log('this is logged on each action', state)));
    // and this
    return merge(...Object.values(actions$)).pipe(tap(state => console.log('this is logged on each action', state)));
    // are identical
  }
)
```

##### Returned value

The function then returns the following object:
- `state` - a plain Vue reactive state, mutable.
- `actions` - transformed reducers, they accept the defined parameters, but mutate the state, instead of just returning its parts.
- `state$` - an observable that emits a new state each time there's an update.
- `actions$` - a map of individual observables per each action, useful for tracking individual action calls.
- `subscribe` - a shorthand for calling `subscribe` on the `state$`, returns the same object with rxjs [`Subscription`](https://rxjs.dev/guide/subscription) mixed-in.

### [Basic example](https://github.com/Raiondesu/vuse-rx/blob/main/docs/.vitepress/theme/recipes/counter.vue)

<ClientOnly>
  <CounterDemo simple/>
</ClientOnly>

```js
const {
  actions: {
    increment,
    setCount
  },
  state,
  state$ // state observable
} = useRxState({ count: 0 })({
  // stateful reducer
  increment: () => state => ({
    // automatic type inference for the state
    count: state.count + 1
  }),

  // stateless reducer
  setCount: (count: string) => ({
    // custom business logic
    count: isNaN(Number(count)) ? 0 : Number(count)
  }),
});

// "Activating" the actions
state$.subscribe(state => console.log('counter: ', state.count));

// One-way data binding from reactive state (with type convertation)
const countRef = syncRef(state, 'count', String),
```

```vue
<template>
  <button @click="increment">increment to {{ state.count + 1 }}</button>
  <br>
  <input v-model="countRef"/>
  <button @click="setCount(countRef)">set count to {{ countRef }}</button>
</template>
```

## `State`

Allows to declaratively define the state type from the result of the first call of `useRxState`:

```ts
// state.ts
import { useRxState, State } from 'vuse-rx';

export const counterState = useRxState({ count: 0 });
export type CounterState = State<typeof counterState>;
// CounterState = { count: number }
```

Commit message:

Feature in docs: a new recipe - shared counter state

docs/api/use-rx-state.md, after:

# State Management

Tools for creating and managing a flux-like state with full RxJS compatibility.

[[toc]]

## `useRxState`

Allows to bind reducers to a reactive state and observables.

[Source](https://github.com/Raiondesu/vuse-rx/blob/main/src/use-rx/use-rx-state.ts)

### Description

Implements a light flux pattern using rxjs' [Observables](https://rxjs.dev/guide/observable).

Even though state management is not the primary concern of `vuse-rx`,
it still allows for a basic flux-like state management with observables using `useRxState`.

This function returns 3 key parts:
- Reactive **state**
- State **reducers**
- RXjs **observable**

All of them work in unison to always keep vue components in sync with the application business logic.

![diagram](/vuse.svg)

The big difference from other flux-like solutions is that
`useRxState` doesn't care whether it's a singleton that manages the state of the whole application
or just used locally in a component. Therefore, it's much more flexible for small- to mid- scale applications.

It accepts, at minimum, an initial state and some reducers:

```ts
const state = { count: 0 };
const reducers = {
  increment: () => state => ({ count: state.count + 1 })
};

// Now using const destructuring:
const {
  // actions that mutate the state via reducers
  actions,

  // vue reactive state
  state,

  // state observable
  state$,

  // observables that are triggered on specific actions
  actions$
} = useRxState(state)(reducers).subscribe();
```

And returns a reactive state, actions, and some observables to make things easier to control.

`useRxState` automatically makes the state reactive for Vue, so you don't need to worry about applying `reactive` to it.

#### Options and fine-tuning

`useRxState` allows to change some of its behaviour via the optional `options` parameter in the first function.

##### Mutation strategy

Via options you can change how new mutations are applied to the state:

```ts
import {
  useRxState,
  // this is the default mutation merge strategy
  deepReplaceArray,
  // fast checker of whether we can mutate the state deeper
  canMergeDeep
} from 'vuse-rx';

useRxState(initialState, {
  mutationStrategy: (
    // A full base state to mutate
    state,
    // Current mutation strategy (this exact function)
    mutate
  ) => (
    // Mutation to apply
    mutation
  ) => {
    // Let's say, we also need to apply our mutations to symbols:
    for (const key of Object.getOwnPropertySymbols(mutation)) {
      // Check if we can go deeper
      state[key] = canMergeDeep(state, mutation, key)
        // If yes - mutate the state further using our function
        ? mutate(state[key])(mutation[key])
        // if no - just assign the value of our mutation
        : mutation[key];
    }

    // Apply the default strategy once we're done
    return deepReplaceArray(state)(mutation);
    // or...

    // if we need to restrict our mutations to symbols only
    // we can just return the state
    // without applying the default strategy
    return state;
  }
});
```

There are 3 mutation strategies provided out-of the box:
- `shallow` - surface-level merge, equivalent to an object spread\
  (`state = { ...state, ...mutation }`)
- `deep` - recursively merges mutations with the state
- `deepReplaceArray` - **DEFAULT** - same as `deep`, but does a simple shallow replacement for arrays

Each mutation strategy sets its own mutation type, so a mutation for the `deep` strategy may be different from a mutation for the `shallow` strategy.

However, mutation type is not restricted to a product of the initial state or an object even!\
You can even pass a string if you want to:

```ts
useRxState({ count: 0 }, {
  // This is not advised, of course, but for the sake of example...
  mutationStrategy: state => (mutation: 'increment' | 'decrement') => ({
    count: mutation === 'increment' ? state.count + 1 : state.count - 1
  }),
})({
  increment: () => 'increment',
  decrement: () => 'decrement',
});
```

### Type Signature and overloads

```ts
function <S extends Record<string, any>, Mutation>(
  initialState: S | (() => S),
  options?: RxStateOptions
) => <R extends StateReducers<S>>(
  reducers: R,
  map$?: (
    state$: Observable<Readonly<S>>,
    reducers: R,
    state: Readonly<S>,
    actions$: Record<`${keyof R}$`, Observable<S>>,
    context: MutationContext
  ) => Observable<Mutation>
) => {
  actions: ReducerActions<R>;
  state: S;
  state$: Observable<S>;
  actions$: ReducerObservables<ReducerActions<R>, S>;
  subscribe: (next?) => {
    actions: ReducerActions<R>;
    state: S;
    state$: Observable<S>;
    actions$: ReducerObservables<ReducerActions<R>, S>;
    subscription: { unsubscribe(): void };
  };
}
```

This function is split into two parts:
1. State-capturing function - determines the shape and contents of the state and returns the second part:
2. Reducers-capturing function - a.k.a. `useStateHook` - binds the reducers to the state and creates an observable for it.

This is done in order to enable [full type inference in reducers](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript/issues/14400#issuecomment-507638537),
as well as to allow different reducers to share the same state without bundling them all in one place in contrast to other flux-like solutions.
For an example of this, see the [shared counter state](/recipes/shared-counter) recipe.

#### 1. **State**-capturing function

```ts
function <S extends Record<string, any>, Mutation = deepReplaceArrayMutation>(
  initialState: S | (() => S),
  options?: RxStateOptions<S, Mutation>
): Function
```

Accepts either a state object or a state factory function and an optional options object.\
It remembers the state, applies the options, and then returns the second function.

This allows to separate away the logic that operates on the state from the state itself.

#### 2. **Reducers**-capturing function

```ts
function <R extends StateReducers<S>>(
  reducers: R,
  map$?: (
    state$: Observable<Readonly<S>>,
    reducers: R,
    state: Readonly<S>,
    actions$: Record<`${keyof R}$`, Observable<S>>,
    context: MutationContext
  ) => Observable<Mutation>
) => SubscribableRxRes<ReducerActions<R>, S>
```

This function is used to bind reducers to the state and produce an observable that reacts to the changes that reducers make on the state.

There's a lot to unpack. Let's go one parameter at-a-time.

For a detailed usage examples with both parameters see the [`stopwatch` recipe](/recipes/stopwatch).

##### Parameter 1: `reducers`

This function's primary goal is to bind reducers to the state.

The reducers are passed in as a first parameter in [the following format](https://github.com/Raiondesu/vuse-rx/blob/main/src/use-rx.ts#L236).
Each **reducer** must **return** either **a part of the state** or **an observable** that emits a part of the state.

A reducer can be either state**ful** or state**less**:
- A state**ful** reducer uses a state object to compute the mutation:\
  For example, an add-reducer:
  ```ts
  // Reducer returns a function that accepts a state and a mutation context
  // and returns the final mutation
  (addAmount) => (state, mutation) => ({ count: state.count + addAmount })
  ```

- A state**less** reducer only uses its initial parameters to compute the mutation:\
  For example, a replace-reducer:
  ```ts
  // Reducer returns the final mutation right away
  (newValue) => ({ count: newValue })
  ```

The resulting mutation is then automatically merged with the current state.

Let's see a complete example:
```ts
useRxState({ count: 0 })({
  // stateful
  add: (addAmount) => (state, mutation) => ({ count: state.count + addAmount }),

  // stateless
  set: (newValue) => ({ count: newValue }),
}).subscribe()
```

It's also possible to inform observables about errors or make them complete
from within the reducers. The `mutation` context parameter is used for this.\
`mutation` is optional, however, so it is recommended to use the
[optional chaining (`?.`) operator](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Optional_chaining)
when using it.

Let's rewrite our `add` reducer with this in mind:
```ts
const maximumValue = 10;

const { actions, state } = useRxState({ count: 0 })({
  add: (addAmount) => (state, mutation) => {
    if (addAmount < 0) {
      // Raise a mutation error
      mutation?.error('add amount cannot be negative!');

      // Signify that no changes need to be made
      return {};
    }

    const newValue = state.count + addAmount;

    if (newValue >= maximumValue) {
      // This mutation will never be called again
      mutation?.complete();
    }

    return { count: newValue };
  }
}).subscribe({
  error: errorText => {
    console.error('Oh no, an error:', errorText);
  },
  complete: () => {
    console.log('Counter stopped at ', state.count);
  }
});

actions.add(9);

// 50%
if (Math.random() > 0.5) {
  actions.add(-1);
  //> Oh no, an error: add amount cannot be negative!
} else {
  actions.add(1);
  //> Counter stopped at 10
}
```

##### Parameter 2: `map$`

It's also possible to modify the resulting observable using the second parameter, `map$`.\
It accepts a function with the following parameters:
- `state$` - the resulting observable (fired on each action)
- `reducers` - a map of raw reducers (basically, the first parameter itself)
- `state` - current reactive state
- `actions$` - a map of all observables that are fired on action calls
- `context` - a current mutation context, same as the one in the reducers,\
  can be passed into the reducers to allow them to control the mutation too
and expects a state observable to be returned from it.

```ts
useRxState(state)(
  reducers,
  // add this parameter to any useRxState call to try
  (state$, reducers, state, actions$, context) => {
    console.log('This is logged only once');
    console.log('These are all reducers defined above, unchanged:', reducers);
    console.log('This is an initial reactive state:', state);
    console.log('This is a map of all actions to their secific observables:', actions$);
    console.log('This context can be used to create an error or to complete the observable:', context);

    // By the way, state$ is just merged actions$,
    // so this
    return state$.pipe(tap(state => console.log('this is logged on each action', state)));
    // and this
    return merge(...Object.values(actions$)).pipe(tap(state => console.log('this is logged on each action', state)));
    // are identical
  }
)
```

##### Returned value

The function then returns the following object:
- `state` - a plain Vue reactive state, mutable.
- `actions` - transformed reducers, they accept the defined parameters, but mutate the state, instead of just returning its parts.
- `state$` - an observable that emits a new state each time there's an update.
- `actions$` - a map of individual observables per each action, useful for tracking individual action calls.
- `subscribe` - a shorthand for calling `subscribe` on the `state$`, returns the same object with rxjs [`Subscription`](https://rxjs.dev/guide/subscription) mixed-in.

### [Basic example](https://github.com/Raiondesu/vuse-rx/blob/main/docs/.vitepress/theme/recipes/counter.vue)

<ClientOnly>
  <CounterDemo simple/>
</ClientOnly>

```js
const {
  actions: {
    increment,
    setCount
  },
  state,
  state$ // state observable
} = useRxState({ count: 0 })({
  // stateful reducer
  increment: () => state => ({
    // automatic type inference for the state
    count: state.count + 1
  }),

  // stateless reducer
  setCount: (count: string) => ({
    // custom business logic
    count: isNaN(Number(count)) ? 0 : Number(count)
  }),
});

// "Activating" the actions
state$.subscribe(state => console.log('counter: ', state.count));

// One-way data binding from reactive state (with type convertation)
const countRef = syncRef(state, 'count', String),
```

```vue
<template>
  <button @click="increment">increment to {{ state.count + 1 }}</button>
  <br>
  <input v-model="countRef"/>
  <button @click="setCount(countRef)">set count to {{ countRef }}</button>
</template>
```

## `State`

Allows to declaratively define the state type from the result of the first call of `useRxState`:

```ts
// state.ts
import { useRxState, State } from 'vuse-rx';

export const counterState = useRxState({ count: 0 });
export type CounterState = State<typeof counterState>;
// CounterState = { count: number }
```
